Awesome.
All right.
So my name is Baldemar.
I help run FurryList, which is a feed, which
is a service that provides feeds for the furry community.
And let me see here.
I completely forgot how to actually do this.
Right.
There we go.
Speaker notes.
Awesome.
All right.
So we're good.
So I have a question for you all.
Awesome.
So what makes you and me different from strangers?
So raise your hand if you're a developmental biologist.
Raise your hand if you're a Mexican.
And now raise your hand if you care about the open web.
That should be everyone.
Yeah.
Okay.
That's what I thought.
All right.
So we have that shared identity and that those shared values.
Right.
As a and we are sharing this space here as a shared
social space based on those values.
Right.
We have that common foundation of trust to build relationships from.
And I'm interested in how exactly we can actually translate those
relationships into the online space in a way that actually reflects how
they exist in the real world as they exist.
And this is what I've kind of been wondering as I
have been helping out with FurryList.
FurryList.
So if you don't know, FurryList is a
service on Blue Sky that provides feeds for the furry community.
But we don't do a global feed.
And we don't just rely on hashtag feeds.
Right.
What we do is we manually curate every single user that
wants to become a member of our community of our feeds.
So we've done that for about 64,000 people now.
We've started doing that early on in Blue Sky when Ot
ter was in charge back then othering our founder.
Now Kev has been the lead.
And we have grown quite a bit since then.
And I'll just show you real quick how it works.
I mean, it's nothing too complicated.
A user follows us, right?
And after that follow, they go into our review backend.
Now the follow itself is a signal of intentionality, right?
They have signal to us that they would like to join our
community.
And our review backend, which looks a little something like this, is
a way for us to check, first off, whether they are furry.
And second off, whether we believe that they would be a good
addition to our community.
So there is a manual creation to our community at every level.
Every single person within our community has been seen by us.
And we have made a manual decision about their belonging within our
community.
Every judgment here is intentional.
So this is a classic, you know, bi-directional membership.
You know, like the user is part of the community because they
wish to be.
And the community allows someone to be part of their community as
well.
This is how most online communities work today, you know?
But, and when we do this, we actually create what I'm
going to call a trust domain.
The user, by being part of, by being part of the community,
implicitly at least initially trusts us to make good decisions for
the community.
And then FurryList then, through this follow record, says
that we believe that they are also a trusted member of the
community.
And, you know, again, this is how most online communities work.
But there are a few issues here that I think I've,
that I started to think about.
Now, the community depends on us for infrastructure and their existence.
Now, to be clear, the community is defined through public records, right?
Like, we follow them.
The follow is a public, is a public record.
But we're the ones who provide the feeds for Furry
List.
And this is, but why is that?
Well, let's see, let's go through, uh, through what happens
when we revoke a record, right?
I mean, if we revoke a record, then there's no
proof that we have about.
There's no historicity to the community.
When it's gone, it's really difficult to prove that you
were part of the community at a protocol level.
And God forbid, if we stop existing, there is no proof that
the community ever existed in the first place.
There's no history or path forward.
Everything has to be rebuilt from scratch.
The community itself dissolves.
I mean, this is as if a social media site, you know,
like, were to disappear.
Like, it, you might be able to have a few friends to
find, but the entire social graph itself is gone, right?
So, I, I divide these problems into, into two different domains.
First, the trust service, the trust domain, lives in the records that
we control.
And if we, and they don't exist independently of us, right?
And secondly, there's no easy way to organize, find, or navigate
what others build on our work.
Again, it's not impossible, but it's, but, but there's
no surface through which to find new things.
We become the default space, and we don't want to be
the default space.
Like, we provide default fees, but we don't want to do
extended governance, uh, uh, because that, in, in, that enhances the surface
through which conflict can happen with a community.
Right?
We have a limited mandate.
Our mandate is to vet members of the community.
If we start doing additional governance on top of that, that is
additional surfaces through which we can come in conflict with the community.
And we put so much effort into, into creating this community.
We don't want it to go all to waste because of
a, because of a mistake that we made.
And, and if, because again, if we make a mistake and things
collapse, it cannot exist independently of us, right?
These are connected issues.
Oh, and, um, so thankfully there, the, uh, permission that I, I
don't, I'm sure that you, a lot of you guys
have been looking at, uh, the permission data infrastructure proposal, or, you
know, like rough proposals that it has been doing, that I think
that actually solves one of the issues, uh, uh, pretty cleanly.
And that's ownership.
So essentially we have a, we have a spectrum here from private
to public data, right?
The, the, the protocol itself was designed for private, with, with a
public data in mind, and you know, the extreme end of private
data would be end to end encryption.
Well, it's two parties who, who, who share a, a, a,
a, a trust boundary, which is probably the smallest trust boundary you
can make.
Now, permission spaces are things, for example, like a discord, like a
private subreddit or a private forum, right?
These are spaces where there is, uh, where there is a shared
domain of trust.
Um, you know, like people within the, a discord community can see
everything within the community, but they can't, but people outside of
it cannot.
Um, so this is, I, this I think is where the importance,
uh, the, the, uh, the interesting, uh, like the interesting part for
communities lie.
And when thinking about, uh, when thinking about ownership of these trust
domains, I think that the, that, uh, that blue sky has come
up with, uh, uh, a correct solution.
So here again, bi-directional follows, uh, each record here lives
in the, in, uh, in each author's repository, which is, you
know, how follow records typically work.
However, uh, within the permission data infrastructure draft so far, there is
a sign at the station that the ACL maintainer, the access
control list maintainer, writes to the, to the user's, um,
uh, repository.
This is signed and this is verifiable independently of whether the
ACL maintainer wants to or not.
And it lives in the user's repository.
It exists independently, right?
So this becomes in a way a historical fact, even if, even
if there is a retraction of the credential, um, this, uh,
this credential still exists and it exists independently of the ACL maintain
er.
Um, now let's think about what furry list does today, uh,
compared to the ACL maintainer in the permission spec.
So we curate a membership list.
They also curate a membership list.
We do vetting.
They also have to do vetting of some kind.
Uh, we use followbacks as proofs.
Credentials in this scenario are proof.
We use unfollows as removals.
You can also do credential withdrawals.
Stop admitting, uh, uh, by, you know, not issuing any new ones.
We already kind of act like an ACL.
We just don't issue any credentials yet.
So this is the, this is, uh, how things existed before, you
know, again, no historicity.
But think about how things look when we actually use these ver
ifiable, uh, these verifiable credentials.
A retraction really is not, uh, like, it, it, it's
not an erasure.
I think about it kind of like how, uh, you know, like,
uh, uh, a scientific journal retracts a paper.
A retraction is a statement that says, we made a mistake.
We no longer believe, uh, this statement that we made is true.
But the paper's still available.
Similar here.
It's a statement.
Like a labeler, right?
Um, the, the history of the decision is preserved.
And the governance that results from it becomes auditable.
And if we disappear, um, in theory, the, the, the, the history
of the community survives.
Because the credentials still exist.
They exist within the user repository.
And in theory, a path to credential, uh, to recovery is possible.
But the important part is that it's possible.
That does not mean that it is, uh, that, that it will
happen.
Without a structure to reorganize around, without a matrix that, that,
that the community exists in, the community still becomes a diaspora,
right?
If we're just defined by the, by, by the ACL, then
we're still back to the, to square one.
If we disappear.
And if our feeds disappear, right?
There's nothing to reorganize around.
Now, we, I think that credential solves the first part pretty nicely.
But what about the second part?
What about the structure itself?
So to do this, I would like to, uh, talk about one
of my, uh, favorite feeds, which is the science feed.
And in many ways, the science feed, um, it does similar work
to furry list.
The science feed, uh, manually checks orchids.
They do staff page, page checks to check whether, uh, something is,
uh, uh, whether an account is associated with a professor.
They check publication lists.
They really do the field work, uh, to, to verify whether someone
is part of their, of, uh, their, you know, scientific community.
This has created, like, an extraordinary trust surface of thousands and thousands
of real world scientists.
It, it, it, it really is just an incredible undertaking, what they
have been able to make here.
But, like, think about, like, what results from this.
It's just one feed.
And it's good feed.
And I love using that feed.
But a feed is not a space.
It's a one of many different conversations that can happen.
I mean, I want to talk, you know, I'm a developmental
biologist.
I want to talk about, like, some help with, like, my zebra
fish experiments.
Or how to use a particular microscope.
Or help with grant proposals.
Things like that.
This would be an amazing trust surface to use it on.
Because I know that the people that are here know what they
're talking about.
But there's nothing there to go to.
And it's not because of the protocol.
The, like, this is publicly accessible.
You can make it, technically.
And, you know, like, you can make that space if you wish.
But there is no way to find it.
Right?
There's no way to, to, to find.
There's no way to find what has been built off of
this infrastructure here.
No matrix through which the community itself can exist.
Apart from what the maintainer itself provides.
So, why does this happen?
I think this is because of something that we should all be
familiar here.
When we think about the app protocol.
And that's the tendency towards centralization.
People want to be where the people are.
You know?
Like, distribution is not a good user experience.
During the beginning there were many.
But, because everyone wants to be in one place where everyone else
is.
Everything converges to one maintainer.
The landlord.
Same thing that happened with, you know, like, you know, the online
social web as well.
Everything converges to one because people want to be where the
people are.
You know?
And I think, I think that a lot of people kind of
ask the question.
Like, how can we fight this?
I don't think that this is really something that we can
or should fight.
It's not a good user experience to do so.
Blue Sky and the app protocol so far has been successful precisely
because it doesn't fight it.
You know?
Blue Sky itself, you know, is the entryway into the app
protocol.
But it does not make you make a choice about which app
you will use.
Because Blue Sky is the default and it's what everyone else
uses.
And from there you can make the choice to exit if you
want to.
I think that we can do something similar if we, with communities.
By giving that centralizing force a limited mandate.
And by making community infrastructure independent, like credentials.
And then make community infrastructure discoverable from the community definition.
From what something like furry list creates.
So, if we allow members of a community to say, define a
government social space.
Which I'm going to call a venue here.
Through some kind of record.
Then that record becomes a link between the infrastructure of the community.
And the definition of the community.
The credentials of the community.
And this opens up a ton of affordances.
Governance now, has a surface for disagreement.
There's two governances here, right?
There's not just the one governance for us.
Which means that if we make, if we make a mistake.
Or something the community disagrees with.
There is a surface here through which that disagreement can surface.
And be absorbed.
Not necessarily the member level.
But at the actual spaces where people exist.
And this can create back pressure.
So, the relationship between these two is now surfaceable at a
protocol level.
Which means that apps.
And app user apps.
Can surface this connection.
Between the community infrastructure.
And the community definition itself.
And because this is emergent from the community itself.
And the community members.
Plurality kind of becomes the norm.
There are many spaces that are run by self-selected
stewards.
Who have decided they care enough about the community to create these
spaces.
That create, that create like different spaces for different needs for the
community.
With different types of governances.
And members can use the ones that they resonate with the most.
And this topology emerges from the users.
It does not emerge from, you know, furry lists.
Or, you know, whoever defines the community itself.
The credential is opening up all of these, all of these different,
all of these different spaces.
A single community can have different spaces.
Run by different operators.
Different governances.
And yet they all here share a trust domain.
Where the credential is the unifying factor.
And users then can, you know, route their posts to different places.
Through, for example, if this, if they're defined by a record.
TID as metadata.
Let's say, for example.
It could, might as well just be like a random hashtag at
the end of the post.
And this can be used as metadata.
As information that defines a space within the public network.
Right?
Because the metadata is unique.
And it does not convey any information.
The information emerges from how people use it.
And this is actually something that I would like to, that I
like to shout out for, with Nighthaven.
Who's a Blue Sky fellow, I believe, has done some good
work in, in kind of exploring this area.
He calls it a mezzanine.
They call it a mezzanine, which I think it
's a, is a really apt description.
Because a mezzanine is, is, shares a space with
the ground floor.
But there's an intentionality to going up there.
There's a, it's a shared frequency where people can congreg
ate.
That still exists within the public network.
So, it exists kind of like this.
You know, like, because these all are, are connected through the, through
the community definition.
Each one is independently, either independently operated.
So they are separate governances, separate stewards, but are all connected.
So, this is what, this is what it could look like.
You know, the roster kind of gives, the roster gives out credentials
to the community members.
The, the, the, the, they can make venues through which, through which
members can then self sort and use the ones that they resonate
with the most.
And, yeah, each node in this graph is an independent agent that
has complete, complete independence and complete agency within their own domains.
But cannot, cannot directly affect the others.
But they can affect the others collectively through back pressure from the
bottom up.
For example, if a venue, you know, if a venue's governance
acts badly, well, they're operating in a public network with public
data, right?
So, they can make a different one.
And they don't have to make a different one in order
to change the governance.
But the mere threat that they could influences venues to act in
accordance to what the community wants, right?
That is a back pressure mechanism of action.
And this also works for the roster.
If the roster makes a bad decision, if they admit someone they
shouldn't have, or they, if they admit someone they shouldn't
have, or they retract trust from someone that they shouldn't have,
each individual venue here can override that decision and say, you made
a bad decision.
And if this happens throughout the community, that is a back pressure
mechanism saying, you are doing, you're, like, you were wrong.
The community disagrees with you.
It is layered back pressure mechanisms.
So, are we done here?
I guess we're done here.
I guess I can just go home.
Oh, right.
So, communities cannot simply exist in public, especially when they share a
trust boundary.
This is, it is a problem to exist only in public for
communities.
If everything is surface level, there's little opportunity for depth of
conversation.
Even if, in the science community, we have created this amazing, this
amazing surface of trust.
But there's little meaningful way to take advantage of it if
every conversation happens in public.
You know?
Every interaction within these spaces is done in front of imagined audiences.
People who you think might be looking at.
And that depth, that community depth, I believe, is important to really
take the full advantage of this trust that we're building.
And, you know, like I said, with the permission data system that
Blue Sky is building, we're already acting kind of like an
ACL.
So, then the question becomes, like, what if we just become the
ACL maintainer?
What if we just become, like, the system that decides who does
and does not gain access to permission data?
Well, this means that not only could posts be made public or
private to our community, but because venues exist as defined as records,
individual venues can also be either public or private or even individual
subspaces within them.
The outside might see all of First Sky.
They might see some of the fursuit maker spaces if
there's, you know, like a sale going on for, like, a
fursuit or something like that.
But they don't see it all unless you're part of
the permission space of the community.
Once you're in this permission space, you can see, for example,
that Bafers exists or that Stemfers exists,
who did not want to share what they were talking about in
public.
You can join in with the advice for fursuit makers
and see, you know, learn how to make a fursuit
for yourself or the fursuit, you know, if you don
't have any experience with it.
Even within these boundaries, you can create another one if you so
wish.
You can create another roster that's just for, like, for example,
Furryless moderators.
And this is just simple set logic, right?
The design space is modular.
And any kind of set logic here is possible because, I mean,
we have the fundamentals here.
We have the boundaries.
And we have the spaces within them.
So, however, if you're thinking about how efficient data system would
work here, you might have noticed something.
If the roster here has full control over the community's ACL
and their permission data, and it can revoke protocol-level access
to the community data, then it's kind of acting like what
the landlord was acting like, right?
They have full control over the community's permission data.
So, haven't we just recreated the landlord, essentially?
And this is where I think the at protocol can really help,
not necessarily at the protocol level, but in the ability to go
off protocol.
So, say that we at Furryless retract that credential for
someone.
We say that we no longer trust them as a member of
our community.
As a result, they lose protocol-level access to the community data.
There is no fix for this, and I don't think that
there should be.
But let's say that a single venue disagrees, in this
case, Furseumakis.
They're governed and still vouches for them.
They still think that they were a valuable member of their community
and that we were too harsh in their decisions.
At the protocol level, there is no fixing this.
But consider what happens when these live in an app, an app
that must govern or moderate what happens within them, you know?
Then something interesting can happen.
If Furseumakis can send a voucher signal within
this permission space and the app view has access to that space,
then the app view can act as a mediator of that
venue's governance.
They can say, well, yes, we have access to all of this
and the roster says, you know, that they do no longer trust
them.
But in this particular social space, in this particular governance space, they
still trust them.
So we can still serve that content to that user and allow
them to interact in this particular space.
But only in that space.
It's a window into the permission space.
And it only exists outside of the protocol.
It exists because the app view is the trusted mediator of
governance between all of these.
So this is the system that I call composable trust.
Each role here, each part here has a particular role.
The roster can issue -- decides who belongs.
But it does not decide what the community looks like or how
they govern themselves.
The venue can govern their space.
They can design their space and set the rules and set what
the space is about.
But they can't yield -- they can't make credentials.
They have to define themselves based on an existing community definition.
The app view assembles the view, enforces -- enforces the
ACL, enforces trust, mediates trust, mediates the venues governance.
But it holds no data.
It cannot make -- it does not make credentials.
It has no governance authority in and of itself.
It's powerful, but it's still replaceable, just as the
rest of these.
And the members themselves are the ones who hold all the cards.
They own the data.
They hold the credentials.
They choose which community definitions to be a part of.
And within those community definitions, within that trust domain, they choose where
they want to be.
And each role here is auditable by the others.
And each one is replaceable without destroying the rest, without destroying
the community.
So compare this to how platforms and online communities exist nowadays.
The platform is at the top.
They control everything below.
The admin for a particular space -- it's usually one person that
controls the space -- is in control of the entire governed space.
The mods -- they might delegate some authority, you know, to the mods.
They're still ultimately at the discretion of the admin.
And the users are at the very bottom.
They are at -- their existence within this space is at the discretion
of all the layers above.
And if one of these fails, everything below it fails.
Now consider how this system works.
This is now a system of roles and relationships.
The community structure itself emerges from the bottom up from the users.
Each node here is -- can be audited by the others.
If any one of these systems violates the community's trust,
they can be replaced.
And if these relationships are surfaced well, if the community structure
is navigable, then the community can survive any one single failure
of these.
Nobody here holds all the power for a community.
The community is built from the bottom up by the people that
inhabit it.
So I think that -- I think that this is a good structure
for a solution.
Remember this -- this diagram that I showed you here?
So this is what a single community looks like.
This is what for realists might look like.
But consider what this could be.
This is what communities could look like.
A navigable trust graph with overlapping affinities, overlapping relationships
that gives structure to communities in a way that no platform, no
AI, no algorithm could make.
Because it is built from the bottom up by the community and
who they trust.
This is a trust graph that is built by all and owned
by none.
So if you would like to help build this, I have a --
I have a more technical proposal up on Leaflet if you
're interested in reading that.
Otherwise, if you are interested in helping build these kinds of sustainable
communities, please do reach out.
I mean, I'm super interested.
I'm hoping to get some schemas out after this conference
and start building something -- something real.
I'm not a coder, but I'm really excited to
see what we can make with this infrastructure and with the protocol.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Is this on?
Ooh.
Thank you so much.
Baldemar.
We have time for maybe one question.
Is there anyone in the audience
with a question?
Yes.
Really interesting.
Thanks.
Do you have a sense for which primitives might be missing
from the protocol right now to support this?
And which are already there and useful?
So, really, like, the biggest thing that is missing is the permission
data infrastructure, the one that has been proposed by Daniel.
And the ability to connect infrastructure to existing, like, lists, for example,
or credentials.
I think that that infrastructure, that simple connection is really from where
all of this can emerge.
And a lot of the, like, the governance aspects of things, you
know, for example, like the enforcing the ACLs and things
like that, really come from the app level, right?
And using metadata from within a post or, you know, whatever have
you to actually compose this.
But, you know, there's not really a ton that is missing
here from the protocol.
I think that once permission data happens and we have that credential
infrastructure to work from, both, like, with a few record schemas,
I think that this, that this can be built.
Well, I think this can be built without much additional infrastructure, you
know?
Thank you so much.
Can we have one more round of applause, please?
Thank you.